# Victor / src

The algorithm itself is written it in [Elm](http://elm-lang.org/), a statically typed functional programming language based on Haskell, that compiles to HTML and JavaScript. There is no need to go into great detail about the reasons for this choice. It is essential to my aims that the program be readily accessible to anyone who might take an interest in the theory. Consequently the obvious thing to do is develop a web application, avoiding the need for users to download or install any additional software, and the need for me to compile different versions for different operating systems. Writing the source code directly in JavaScript, however, is undesirable for a number of reasons, most of which will be familiar to anyone with experience of that hastily-written language, and none of which need repeating here. Elm offers all the benefits of web deployment with none of the drawbacks of JavaScript, not to mention all the intrinsic advantages of a well-developed, academically robust language like Haskell.

The source code is divided into two subdirectories, `Interface` and `Theory`. The former directory contains all of the modules responsible for generating the web page users see, for keeping track of user input, and for piecing that input together into a message variable. It is the modules in the latter directory that are of theoretical interest, since they describe what a message variable looks like, and define the encoding function that converts these variables into strings. Thus it is to [the README in the `src/Theory` directory](https://github.com/merivale/victor/tree/master/src/Theory) that I suggest you now turn.
